I've only been sitting here a few
minutes and I've already been sneezed on
several times
it's iguanas snot and its really salty
what they're actually doing is excreting
the salt that they take in when they
ingest all that seaweed get it from all
angles here by basking these iguanas
will have raised their body temperature
to about the same level as mine it will
help keep their core tissues functioning
underwater all around me the iguanas
seem to be heading for the sea
they've been sunbathing for a few hours
a little hot probably a little bit
hungry and they're ready for a swim you
know what so my
but how will they shape up as freedivers
from the moment they take the plunge
these reptiles are cooling down and if
they stay at sea too long and get too
cold
their metabolism will shut down and they
will die but their first obstacle is the
swell breaking against this exposed
shoreline it's when those long claws
really come into their own
although they're only grazing in the
shallows it's not an easy freedive as
the swell really throws me around but
the iguana's seen use to it they dive as
we do with their lungs inflated full of
air which might maximize the time they
can stay underwater but it also makes
them buoyant so it's sometimes a real
struggle to stay submerged
they swim using their strong snake-like
tail to power them down
they rarely hold their breath for longer
than five minutes and most only died for
about one minute usually to a depth of
only a few meters
in that limited depth and time they must
find a suitable clump of seaweed and
devour what they can
there's so much in the water and the
iguanas are actually quite hard to spot
but when you do see them just changes
your opinion of them completely there's
so graceful underwater there's all these
big boulders just covered with seaweed
and now you just swim along and there's
a big one or just munching down on a rod
amazingly this prehistoric free diver
shares something in common with us
humans their heart rate slows by about
60% that's not unlike me when I free
dive but I got to say it's quite hard to
keep my heart rate under control when I
get up close to them this lowering of
the heart rate is a phenomenon known as
the dive reflex it's a subconscious
reaction triggered when receptors around
our eyes and mouths are submerged it's a
primitive trait one we've inherited from
a common ancestor